---
layout: osdoc
title: EPOS workshop 2015
group: General
parser: academicmarkdown
menuclass: external
permalink: /epos2015/
ext_url: /epos2015
---

This tutorial is part of the EPOS course *online data acquisition in experimental psychology*, which will take place September 24, 9:00 - 18:00. For more information, visit:

- <http://www.eposgradnet.nl/?page_id=548>

%--
figure:
 id: FigEPOS
 source: epos-logo.png
 caption: The EPOS logo.
--%

## Overview

%--
toc:
 mindepth: 2
 maxdepth: 2
 exclude: [Overview]
--%

## Requirements

### Expertise

- A basic knowledge of experimental design is assumed.
- No prior experience with OpenSesame is assumed.
- No prior experience with Python is assumed for the main tutorial.

### Equipment

- University computers on which OpenSesame is pre-installed will be available during the workshop.
- If you bring your own laptop, please install OpenSesame before the workshop.
- OpenSesame is available for Windows XP/ 7/ 8, Linux, and Mac OS. If you are running Mac OS, you are advised to verify beforehand that OpenSesame runs properly on your system, because Mac OS support is still experimental.
- If you have an Android tablet or phone, you can bring it along to run your experiment on a tablet! If you bring an Android device, please install the [OpenSesame runtime for Android] before the workshop.

### Materials

- The primary resource for the workshop is this page, which can be downloaded in `.pdf` format from [here][pdf]. Print-outs will be available for attendees.

## Introduction

You can download the introduction slides from [here][slides].

## About

We will create a simple animal-filled multisensory integration task, in which participants see a picture of a dog, cat, or capybara. In addition, a meowing or barking sound is played. To make things more fun, we will design the experiment so that you can run it on an Android device, using the [OpenSesame runtime for Android]. You will see that this requires hardly any additional effort.

The participant's task is to report whether a dog or a cat is shown, by tapping (or clicking) on the left (dog) or right (cat) side of the screen. No response should be given when a capybara is shown (i.e. those are catch trials). The prediction is simple: Participants should be faster to identify dogs when a barking sound is played, and faster to identify cats when a meowing sound is played. In other words, we expect a multisensory congruency effect. A secondary prediction is that when participants see a capybara, they are more likely to report seeing a dog when they hear a bark, and more likely to report seeing a cat when they hear a meow.

%--
figure:
 id: FigMeowingCapybara
 source: meowing-capybara.png
 caption: |
  Don't be fooled by meowing capybaras! ([Source](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Capybara_Hattiesburg_Zoo_\(70909b-58\)_2560x1600.jpg))
--%

## Experimental design

This design:

- is *within-subject*, because all participants do all conditions
- is *fully-crossed* (or full factorial), because all combinations of conditions occur
- has two conditions (or factors):
    - *visual* with three levels (cat, dog, capybara), or V<sub>3</sub>
    - *auditory* with two levels (meow, bark), or A<sub>2</sub>
- has N subjects, or <u>S</u><sub>N</sub>

Following the notation of Rouanet and Lepine [(1977)][references], you can write this design as: <u>S</u><sub>N</sub>×V<sub>3</sub>×A<sub>2</sub> 

## Step 1: Download and start OpenSesame

OpenSesame is available for Windows, Linux, Mac OS (experimental), and Android (runtime only). This tutorial is written for OpenSesame 2.9.7 or later. You can download OpenSesame from here:

- <http://osdoc.cogsci.nl/>

When you start OpenSesame, you will be given a choice of template experiments, and a list of recently opened experiments (if any, see %FigStartUp).

%--
figure:
 id: FigStartUp
 source: start-up.png
 caption: |
  The OpenSesame window on start-up.
--%

The 'Droid template' provides a good starting point for creating Android-based experiments. However, in this tutorial we will create the entire experiment from scratch. Therefore, we will continue with the 'default template', which is already loaded when OpenSesame is launched (%FigDefaultTemplate).

%--
figure:
 id: FigDefaultTemplate
 source: default-template.png
 caption: |
  The structure of the 'Default template' as seen in the overview area.
--%

<div class='info-box' markdown='1'>

### Background box 1

Using software to build an experiment is mainly about defining what a trial should entail in that experiment. Here, a trial is best seen as a `sequence` of things. For example, perhaps you first want to display a screen with a dot in the middle to make sure participants are focusing on the screen center; then you want to display a stimulus, perhaps play a sound; and in most cases you also want to collect a response, such as a button press. In OpenSesame, a `sequence` (that is, a trial) may look like this:

%--
figure:
 id: FigExampleSequence
 source: example-sequence.png
 caption: |
  An simple example of a `sequence` item, where a stimulus will be displayed by the `sketchpad`, a response will be collected by `keyboard_response`, and a `logger` to write the trial information to a logfile
--%

Once you have defined this sequence, you just want to make sure that the sequence is repeated for as many times as your specific experiment requires (equalling the amount of trials you envisaged). Of course the software won’t require you to define a sequence 200 times in order for you to get 200 trials; instead, you can place your sequence in a `loop` item that runs anything it contains for as many times as you want.

Could it really be that simple? Well, yes and no. Yes, displaying something on screen 200 times is really that simple; but then again, in most experiments the one trial isn’t quite the same as the next. Luckily, this still doesn’t mean that you have to define 200 individual sequences. Rather, you can tell the loop item what things exactly need to change from one trial to the next. For instance, you could define parameters such as *stimulus_display_time* (with values 500, 1000 and 1500 milliseconds), *stimulus_size* (with values ‘small’, ‘medium’ and ‘large’) or *sound_played* (with values ‘yes’ and ‘no’). With the loop item you can make sure that your experiment is automatically fully crossed, so that all possible condition combinations occur evenly across the 200 trials, (in fact, in the above example you’d have 3 x 3 x 2 = 18 different combinations: if all of these are run 11 times, you would have 198 trials in total). A `loop` item will look like this:

%--
figure:
 id: FigLoopTable
 source: loop-table.png
 caption: |
  An example of variables defined in a loop table. (This example is not related to the experiment created in this tutorial.)
--%

This `loop` depicts two parameters: *soa* and *target*, each of which may be set to one of two values. The `loop` will make sure that all (four) condition combinations occur - if it runs our trial sequence at least four times of course. If we need a total of 200 trials, we would set `each cycle` to 50. 

In the next steps, you will learn how to create a sequence and make it work in tandem with the loop item.

</div>

## Step 2: Making your experiment Android-ready

Click on 'New experiment' in the overview area to open a tab that has some general options for the experiment. To make our experiment work on Android devices, we need to select the *droid* back-end in the 'back-end' pull-down menu.

Change the resolution to 1280 x 800 px. You don't have to worry about the actual resolution of the phone/ tablet that you will run the experiment on, because the display will be scaled automatically. But 1280 x 800 px is the resolution that you will develop with.

That's it. You have now made the necessary changes to run your experiment on Android!

<div class='info-box' markdown='1'>

### Background box 2

The *back-end* is the layer of software that controls the display, input devices, sound, etc. Many experiments will work with all back-ends, but there are reasons to prefer one back-end over the other, mostly related to timing and cross-platform support. For more information about back-ends, see:

- [/back-ends/about](/back-ends/about)

</div>

## Step 3: Add a block_loop and trial_sequence

The default template starts with three items:

- a `notepad` called *getting_started*;
- a `sketchpad` called *welcome*;
- and a `sequence` called *experiment*.

We don't need *getting_started* and *welcome*, so let's remove these right away. To do so, right-click on these items and select 'Delete'. Don't remove *experiment*, because it is the entry for the experiment (i.e. the first item that is called when the experiment is started).

Our experiment will have a very simple structure. At the top of the hierarchy is a loop, which we will call *block_loop*. The *block_loop* is the place where we will define our independent variables (see also Background box 1). To add a `loop` to your experiment, drag the `loop` icon from the item toolbar onto the *experiment* item in the overview area.

A `loop` item always needs another item to run, usually a `sequence` (see also [Background box 1]). To 'fill' the newly created `loop` with a `sequence`, simply drag a `sequence` from the item toolbar onto *loop*. A pop-up menu will ask you whether you want to add the `sequence` after the loop (no thank you), or whether you set the `sequence` as the `loop`'s item to run. Choose the last option.

By default, items have names such as *sequence*, *loop*, *_sequence*, etc. These names are not very informative, and it is good practice to rename them. Item names must consist of alphanumeric characters and/ or underscores. To rename an item, right-click on the item in the overview area and select 'Rename'. Rename *sequence* to *trial_sequence* to indicate that it will correspond to a single trial. Rename *loop* to *block_loop* to indicate that will correspond to a block of trials.

The overview area of our experiment now looks as in %FigStep3.

%--
figure:
 id: FigStep3
 source: step3.png
 caption: |
  The overview area at the end of Step 3.
--%

<div class='info-box' markdown='1'>

### Background box 3

__Tip__ -- Deleted items are still available in the 'Unused items' bin, until you select 'Permanently delete unused items' in the 'Unused items' tab. To restore deleted items, simply drag them back into the experiment.

</div>

## Step 4: Import images and sound files

For this experiment, we will use images of cats, dogs, and capybaras. We will also use sound samples of meows and barks. You can download all the required files from here:

- [/attachments/cats-dogs-capybaras/stimuli.zip](/attachments/cats-dogs-capybaras/stimuli.zip)

Download `stimuli.zip` and extract it somewhere (to your desktop, for example). Next, in OpenSesame, click on the 'Show file pool' button in the main toolbar (or: Menu -> View -> Show file pool). This will show the file pool, by default on the right side of the window. The easiest way to add the stimuli to the file pool is by dragging them from the desktop (or wherever you have extracted the files to) into the file pool. Alternatively, you can click on the '+' button in the file pool and add files using the file-selection dialog that appears. 

In OpenSesame 2.9.X (and earlier) the file pool will automatically be saved with your experiment if you save your experiment in the `.opensesame.tar.gz` format. In OpenSesame 3.0.X (and later) the file pool is always saved along with your experiment.

After you have added all stimuli, your file pool looks as in %FigStep4.

%--
figure:
 id: FigStep4
 source: step4.png
 caption: |
  The file pool at the end of Step 4.
--%

## Step 5: Define the experimental variables in the block_loop

As described under [Experimental design], the conceptual design of our experiment is <u>S</u><sub>N</sub>×V<sub>3</sub>×A<sub>2</sub>: We have three types of visual stimuli (cats, dogs, and capybaras) which occur in combination with two types of auditory stimuli (meows and barks). And, of course, we have *N* participants.

However, we have five exemplars for each stimulus type: five meow sounds, five capybara pictures, etc. From a technical point of view, it therefore makes sense to add two new factors:

- Five pictures, or PIC<sub>5</sub>
- Five sound files, or SND<sub>5</sub>

The design therefore becomes: <u>S</u><sub>N</sub>×PIC<sub>5</sub>×SND<sub>5</sub>×V<sub>3</sub>×A<sub>2</sub>

<div class='info-box' markdown='1'>

### Background box 4

Usually, when you describe your experimental design, you don't mention factors such as subject (<u>S</u><sub>N</sub>), picture (PIC<sub>5</sub>), or sound (SND<sub>5</sub>). This is because these are *random effects*; that is, they are randomly chosen exemplars, and you assume that your experimental manipulation generalizes to all subjects, sounds, and pictures. In contrast, factors such as our visual and auditory stimuli are *fixed effects*; they are what you manipulated.

(There are many different definitions of fixed and random effects; however, I think that the simple definition above is what most psychologists have in mind when they use these terms.)

</div>

OpenSesame is very good at generating full-factorial designs. First, open *block_loop* by clicking on it in the overview area. Next, click on the 'Variable wizard' button. The variable wizard is a tool for generating full-factorial designs. It works in a straightforward way: Every column corresponds to an experimental variable (i.e. a factor). The first row is the name of the variable, the rows below contain all possible values (i.e. levels). In our case, we can specify our design as shown in %FigLoopWizard.

%--
figure:
 id: FigLoopWizard
 source: loop-wizard.png
 caption: |
  The loop wizard generates full-factorial designs.
--%

After clicking 'Ok', you will see that there is a `loop` table with four rows, one for each experimental variable. There are 150 cycles (=5x5x3x2), which means that we have 150 unique trials. Your `loop` table now looks as in %FigStep5.

%--
figure:
 id: FigStep5
 source: step5.png
 caption: |
  The `loop` table at the end of Step 5.
--%

## Step 6: Add items to the trial sequence

Open *trial_sequence*. You will see that the `sequence` is empty. It's time to add some items! Our basic *trial_sequence* is:

1. A `sketchpad` to display a central fixation dot for 500 ms.
2. A `sampler` to play an animal sound.
3. A `sketchpad` to display an animal picture.
4. A `touch_response` to collect a response.
5. A `logger` to write the data to file.

To add these items, simply drag them one by one from the item toolbar onto the *trial_sequence*. If necessary, you can open *trial_sequence* and re-order it by dragging the newly added items by their grab-handle (i.e. the four-square icon on the left). Once all items are in the correct order, give each of them a sensible name. The overview area now looks as shown in %FigStep6.

%--
figure:
 id: FigStep6
 source: step6.png
 caption: |
  The overview area at the end of Step 6.
--%

## Step 7: Define the central fixation dot

Click on *fixation_dot* in the overview area. This will open a basic drawing board that you can use to design your stimulus displays. To draw a central fixation dot, first click on the fixation-dot icon (with the small gray circle) and then click on the center of the display, i.e. at position (0, 0).

We also need to specify for how long the fixation dot is visible. To do so, change the duration from 'keypress' to 495 ms, in order to specify a 500 ms duration. (See [Background box 5] for an explanation.)

The *fixation_dot* item now looks as in %FigStep7.

%--
figure:
 id: FigStep7
 source: step7.png
 caption: |
  The *fixation_dot* item at the end of Step 7.
--%

<div class='info-box' markdown='1'>

### Background box 5

Why specify a duration of 495 if we want a duration of 500 ms? The reason for this is that the actual display-presentation duration is always rounded up to a value that is compatible with your monitor's refresh rate. This may sound complicated, but for most purposes the following rules of thumb are sufficient:

1. Choose a duration that is possible given your monitor's refresh rate. For example, if your monitor's refresh rate is 60 Hz, it means that every frame lasts 16.7 ms (=1000 ms/60 Hz). Therefore, on a 60 Hz monitor, you should always select a duration that is a multiple of 16.7 ms, such as 16.7, 33.3, 50, 100, etc.
2. In the duration field of the `sketchpad` specify a duration that is a few milliseconds shorter than what you're aiming for. So if you want to present a `sketchpad` for 50 ms, choose a duration of 45. If you want to present a `sketchpad` for 1000 ms, choose a duration of 995. Etcetera.

For a detailed discussion of experimental timing, see:

- [/miscellaneous/timing](/miscellaneous/timing)

</div>

## Step 8: Define the animal sound

Open *animal_sound*. You will see that the `sampler` item provides a number of options, the most important one of which is the sound file that is to be played. Click on the browse button to open the file-pool selection dialog, and select one of the sound files, such as `bark1.ogg`.

Of course, we don't want to play the same sound over-and-over again. Instead, we want to select a sound based on the variables `auditory` and `sound_nr` that we have defined in the *block_loop* (Step 5). To do this, simply replace the part of the string that you want to have depend on a variable by the name of that variable between square brackets. More specifically, 'bark1.ogg' becomes '[auditory][sound_nr].ogg', because we want to replace 'bark' by the value of the variable `auditory` and '1' by the value of `sound_nr`.

We also need to change the duration of the `sampler`. By default, the duration is 'sound', which means that the experiment will pause while the sound is playing. Change the duration to 0. This does not mean that the sound will be played for only 0 ms, but that the experiment will advance right away to the next item, while the sound continues to play in the background. The item *animal_sound* now looks as shown in %FigStep8.

%--
figure:
 id: FigStep8
 source: step8.png
 caption: |
  The item *animal_sound* at the end of Step 8.
--%

<div class='info-box' markdown='1'>

### Background box 6

For more information about using variables, see:

- [/usage/variables-and-conditional-statements/](/usage/variables-and-conditional-statements/)

</div>

## Step 9: Define the animal picture

Open *animal_picture*. This will again open a `sketchpad` drawing board. Now select the image tool by clicking on the button with the landscape-like icon. Click on the center of the screen (0, 0). The 'Select file from pool' dialog will appear. Select the file `capybara1.png` and click on 'Select'. The capybara will now lazily stare at you from the center of the screen. But of course, we don't always want to show the same capybara. Instead, we want to have the image depend on the variables `visual` and `pic_nr` that we have defined in the *block_loop* (Step 5).

We can use the basic same trick as we did for *animal_sound*, although things work slightly differently for images. First, click on view-menu icon at the top-right of the tab area (left of the help icon) and select 'View script'. This will show the script that corresponds to this `sketchpad`:

~~~
set duration "keypress"
set reset_variables "no"
draw image 0 0 "capybara1.png" scale=1 center=1 z_index=0 show_if="always"
~~~

Now change the name of image file from 'capybara.png' to '[visual][pic_nr].png' ...

~~~
set duration "keypress"
set reset_variables "no"
draw image 0 0 "[visual][pic_nr].png" scale=1 center=1 z_index=0 show_if="always"
~~~

... and click on 'Apply and close'. The capybara is now replaced by a placeholder image, and OpenSesame tells you that the image is unknown or variably defined. Don't worry, it will be shown during the experiment!

To remind the participant of the task, we will also add two response circles, one marked 'dog' on the left side of the screen, and one marked 'cat' on the right side. I'm sure you will able to figure out how to do this with the `sketchpad` drawing tools. My version is shown in %FigStep9. Note that these response circles are purely visual, and we still need to explicitly define the response criteria (see Step 10).

Finally, set 'Duration' field to '0'. This does not mean that the picture is presented for only 0 ms, but that the experiment will advance to the next item (the *touch_response*) right away. Since the *touch_response* waits for a response, but doesn't change what's on the screen, the target will remain visible until a response has been given.

%--
figure:
 id: FigStep9
 source: step9.png
 caption: |
  The *animal_picture* `sketchpad` at the end of Step 9.
--%

<div class='info-box' markdown='1'>

### Background box 7

__Tip__ -- OpenSesame can handle a wide variety of image formats. However, some (non-standard) `.bmp` formats are known to cause trouble. If you find that a `.bmp` image is not shown, you may want to consider using a different format, such as `.png`. You can convert images easily with free tools such as [GIMP].

</div>

## Step 10: Define the touch response

Open the *touch_response* item. The *touch_response* collects a tap (for devices with a touch screen) or a mouse click (for devices with a mouse) and automatically recodes the response coordinates into discrete response values based on a grid. This may sound a bit abstract, but it simply means the following. The display is divided into a grid and each cell in the grid gets a number. The value of the response is the number of the cell that is tapped/ clicked. For example, if you divide the display into four columns and three rows and the participant taps the cell labeled '7', then the `response` variable will have the value '7' (see %FigTouchResponse).

%--
figure:
 id: FigTouchResponse
 source: touch_response.png
 caption: |
  The `touch_response` item records display taps and mouse clicks and assigns a response value based on a grid.
--%

In our case, we simply divide the screen into a left and a right side, which means that we have to set the number of columns to 2 and the number of rows to 1 (it is by default). Following the logic shown in %FigTouchResponse, the left side of the display now corresponds to a 1 response, and the right side corresponds to a 2 response. (We are therefore much more liberal than the visual response circles of %FigStep9 suggest, because we accept taps/ clicks anywhere on the screen.)

Finally, we have to make it possible for participants *not* to respond, because the response should be withheld on capybara trials. To do so, we change the 'Timeout' field from 'infinite' to '2000'. This means that the response will automatically time out after 2000 ms. When this happens, the response will be set to 'None' and the experiment will continue.

The *touch_response* now looks as in %FigStep10.

%--
figure:
 id: FigStep10
 source: step10.png
 caption: |
  The *touch_response* at the end of Step 10.
--%

## Step 11: Define the correct response

So far, we haven't defined what the correct response is for each stimulus. Typically, this is done by defining a `correct_response` variable in the `loop` table. Response items, such as the *touch_response* will automatically use this variable to decide whether a response was correct or not,  unless a different correct response is explicitly provided in the item.

Open the *block_loop*. Click on 'Add variable' and add a variable named 'correct_response'. This will add a long empty column to the table. On rows where `animal` is 'dog', set `correct_response` to 1 (i.e. left-side tap). Where `animal` is 'cat', set `correct_response` to 2 (i.e. right-side tap). Where `animal` is 'capybara' set `correct_response` to 'None' (i.e. a timeout). I recommend using some clever copy-pasting to save some time!

## Step 12: Define the logger

Actually, we don't need to configure the `logger`, but let's take a look at it anyway. Click on *logger* in the overview to open it. You will see that the option 'Automatically detect and log all variables' is selected. This means that OpenSesame logs everything, which is fine.

<div class='info-box' markdown='1'>

### Background box 8

__The one tip to rule them all__ -- Always triple-check whether all the necessary variables are logged in your experiment! The best way to check this is to run the experiment and investigate the resulting log files.

</div>

## Step 13: Add per-trial feedback

It is good practice to inform the participant of whether the response was correct or not. To avoid disrupting the flow of the experiment, this type of immediate feedback should be as unobtrusive as possible. Here, we will do this by briefly showing a green fixation dot after a correct response, and a red fixation dot after an incorrect response.

First, add two new `sketchpad`s to the end of the *trial_sequence*. Rename the first one to *feedback_correct* and the second one to *feedback_incorrect*. Of course, we want to select only one of these items on any given trial, depending on whether or not the response was correct. To do this, we can make use of the built-in variable `correct`, which has the value 0 after an incorrect response, and 1 after a correct response. (Provided that we have defined `correct_response`, which we did in Step 11.) To tell the *trial_sequence* that the *feedback_correct* item should be called only when the response is correct, we use the following run-if statement:

	[correct] = 1

The square brackets around `correct` indicate that this is the name of a variable, and not simply the string 'correct'. Analogously, we use the following run-if statement for the *feedback_incorrect* item:

	[correct] = 0

We still need to give content to the *feedback_correct* and *feedback_incorrect* items. To do this, simply open the items and draw a green or red fixation dot in the center. Also, don't forget to change the durations from 'keypress' to some brief interval, such as 195.

The *trial_sequence* now looks as shown in %FigStep13.

%--
figure:
 id: FigStep13
 source: step13.png
 caption: |
  The *trial_sequence* at the end of Step 13.
--%

<div class='info-box' markdown='1'>

### Background box 9

For more information about conditional 'if' statements, see:

- [/usage/variables-and-conditional-statements/](/usage/variables-and-conditional-statements/)

</div>

## Step 14: Add instructions and goodbye screens

A good experiment always start with an instruction screen, and ends by thanking the participant for his or her time. The easiest way to do this in OpenSesame is with `form_text_display` items.

Drag two `form_text_display`s into the main *experiment* `sequence`. One should be at the very start, and renamed to *form_instructions*. The other should be at the very end, and renamed to *form_finished*. Now simply add some appropriate text to these forms, for example as shown in %FigStep14.

%--
figure:
 id: FigStep14
 source: step14.png
 caption: |
  The *form_instructions* item at the end of Step 15.
--%

<div class='info-box' markdown='1'>

### Background box 10

__Tip__ -- Forms, and text more generally, support a subset of HTML tags to allow for text formatting (i.e. colors, boldface, etc.). This is described here:

- [/usage/text/](/usage/text/)

</div>

## Step 15: Finished!

Your experiment is now finished! Click on the 'Run fullscreen' (`Control+R`) button in the main toolbar to give it a test run. If you have an Android device, you can transfer the experiment file to the device (typically to the SD card), launch the [OpenSesame runtime for Android], and select the experiment file to launch it.

<div class='info-box' markdown='1'>

### Background box 11

__Tip__ -- A test run is executed even faster by clicking the orange 'Run in window' button, which doesn't ask you how to save the logfile (and should therefore only be used for testing purposes).

</div>

## References

Mathôt, S., Schreij, D., & Theeuwes, J. (2012). OpenSesame: An open-source, graphical experiment builder for the social sciences. *Behavior Research Methods*, *44*(2), 314–324. doi:10.3758/s13428-011-0168-7
{: .reference}

Rouanet, H., & Lepine, D. (1977). Structures linéaires et analyse des comparaisons. *Mathématiques et Sciences Humaines*, *56*, 5–46. Retrieved from: <http://www.numdam.org/item?id=MSH_1977__56__5_0>
{: .reference}

[OpenSesame runtime for Android]: /getting-opensesame/android
[slides]: /attachments/rovereto2014-workshop-slides.pdf
[modulo]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modulo_operation
[pdf]: /rovereto2014/index.pdf
[gimp]: http://www.gimp.org/
