---
layout: osdoc
title: Kurt Lewin Institute Workshop 2020 Part 2
group: Tutorials
permalink: /KLWI-IAT-simple/
---

## Part 2 Kurt Lewin Institute Workshop 2020

%--
figure:
 id: KLI
 source: KLI.png
--%

## Gaze cuing

In this tutorial, you will create a gaze-cuing experiment, as introduced by [Friesen and Kingstone (1998)][references]. In this experiment, a face is presented in the center of the screen (%FigGazeCuing). This face looks either to the right or to the left. A target letter (an 'F' or an 'H') is presented to the left or right of the face. A distractor stimulus (the letter 'X') is presented on the other side of the face. The task is to indicate as quickly as possible whether the target letter is an 'F' or an 'H'. In the *congruent* condition, the face looks at the target. In the *incongruent* condition, the face looks at the distractor.


%--
figure:
 id: FigGazeCuing
 source: gaze-cuing.png
 caption: |
  The gaze-cuing paradigm [(Friesen and Kingstone, 1998)][references] that you will implement in this tutorial. This example depicts a trial in the incongruent condition, because the smiley looks at the distractor ('X') and not at the target ('F').
--%


## Prediction

As you may have guessed, the typical finding is that participants respond faster in the congruent condition, compared to to the incongruent condition, even though the direction of gaze is not predictive of the target location. This shows that our attention is automatically guided by other people's gaze, even in situations where this doesn't serve any purpose. (And even when the face is just a smiley!)

The experiment consists of a practice and an experimental phase. Visual feedback will be presented after every block of trials, and a sound will be played after every incorrect response.

## Experimental design

This design:

- is *within-subject*, because all participants do all conditions
- is *fully-crossed* (or full factorial), because all combinations of conditions occur
- has three factors (or independent variables):
    - *gaze side* with two levels (left, right)
    - *target side* with two levels (left, right)
    - *target letter* with two levels (F, H)

%--
figure:
 id: conditions
 source: conditions.png
 caption: |
  The factors in the current experiment are fully crossed. This figure shows the four combinations of the factors *gaze side* and *target side*.
--%

## Step 1: Create the main sequence

When you start OpenSesame, you'll see a 'Get started!' tab, which shows you a list of templates as well as recently opened experiments (%GetStarted). As before, we will use the 'Extended template'.

%--
figure:
 id: GetStarted
 source: get-started.png
 caption: |
  OpenSesame's welcome window. Here, we use the 'extended template'.
--%

After opening the extended template, we start by saving our experiment. To do this, click *File* -> *Save*, brows to the appropriate folder and give your experiment a meaningful name.

%--
figure:
 id: FigGetStarted
 source: get-started.png
 caption: |
  The 'Get started' dialog on OpenSesame start-up.
--%


<div class='info-box' markdown='1'>

__Tip__ -- %Hierarchy schematically shows the structure of the experiment that you will create. If you get confused during the tutorial, you can refer to %Hierarchy to see where you are.

%--
figure:
 id: Hierarchy
 source: hierarchy.png
 caption: |
  A schematic representation of the structure of the 'Gaze cuing' experiment.
--%

</div>


__Removing some items from the overvew area__

As a start, remove the following items from the experimental hierarchy (right mouse click -> remove or shortcult `Del`):

- *about_this_template*
- *instructions*
- *end_of_practice*
- *end_of_experiment*

Next, remove the items from the 'Unused items' bin, by clicking on this part of the overview area and clicking 'Permanently delete unused items'.

__Append a `form_text_display` item for the instruction display__

As the name suggests, a `form_text_display` is a form that displays text. We are going to use a `form_text_display` (instead of a `sketchpad` item) to give instructions to the participant at the beginning of the experiment.

Drag a `form_text_display` from the item toolbar (under 'Form') onto the *experiment* sequence in the overview area. When you let go, a new `form_text_display` item will be inserted into the *experiment* sequence. Rename this item to *instructions*. Make sure the item appears at the very beginning of the experiment.

__Append a new `form_text_display` item, for the goodbye message__

When the experiment is finished, we should say goodbye to the participant. For this we need another `form_text_display` item. Drag a `form_text_display` from the item toolbar onto *experimental_loop*. In the pop-up menu that appears, select 'Insert after experimental_loop'. Rename this item to *goodbye*.

The overview area of your experiment now looks like %FigStep1. This would be a good time to save your experiment (shortcut: `Ctrl+S`).

%--
figure:
 id: FigStep1
 source: step1.png
 caption: |
  The overview area at the end of the step 1.
--%

<div class='info-box' markdown='1'>

__Background box__

__Tip__ — If you don't like having many tabs open, you can close all tabs except the currently opened one by clicking on the 'Close other tabs' button in the main toolbar (shortcut: `Ctrl+T`).

</div>

## Step 2: Fill the block loop with independent variables

As the name suggests, *block_loop* corresponds to a single block of trials. In the previous step we created the *block_loop*, but we still need to define the independent variables that will be varied within the block. Our experiment has three independent variables:

- __gaze_cue__ can be 'left' or 'right'.
- __target_pos__ (the position of the target) can be '-300' or '300'. These values reflect the X-coordinate of the target in pixels (0 = center). Using the coordinates directly, rather than 'left' and 'right', will be convenient when we create the target displays (see Step 5).
- __target_letter__ (the target letter) can be 'F' or 'H'.

Therefore, our experiment has 2 x 2 x 2 = 8 levels. Although 8 levels is not that many (most experiments will have more), we don't need to enter all possible combinations by hand. Click on *block_loop* in the overview to open its tab. Now click on the 'Full-factorial design' button. In the variable wizard, you simply define all variables by typing the name in the first row and the levels in the rows below the name (see %FigVariableWizard). If you select 'Ok', you will see that *block_loop* has been filled with all 8 possible combinations.

In the resulting loop table, each row corresponds to one run of *trial_sequence*. Because, in our case, one run of *trial_sequence* corresponds to one trial, each row in our loop table corresponds to one trial. Each column corresponds to one variable, which can have a different value on each trial.

%--
figure:
 id: FigVariableWizard
 source: variable-wizard.png
 caption: |
  The loop variable wizard in Step 2.
--%

But we are not done yet. We need to add three more variables: the location of the distractor, the correct response, and the congruency.

- __dist_pos__ -- On the first row of the first empty column, enter 'dist_pos'. This automatically adds a new experimental variable named 'dist_pos'. In the rows below, enter '300' wherever 'target_pos' is -300, and '-300' wherever 'target_pos' is 300. In other words, the target and the distractor should be positioned opposite from each other.
- __correct_response__ -- Create another variable, in another empty column, with the name 'correct_response'. Set 'correct_response' to 'z' where 'target_letter' is 'F', and to 'm' where 'target_letter' is 'H'. This means that:
    - The participant should press the 'z' key if he/she sees an 'F'
    - and the 'm' key if he/she sees an 'H'.
- __congruency__ -- Create another variable with the name 'congruency'. Set 'congruency' to 'congruent' where 'target_pos' is '-300' and 'gaze_cue' is 'left', and where 'target_pos' is '300' and 'gaze_cue' is 'right'. In other words, a trial is congruent if the face looks at the target. Set 'congruency' to 'incronguent' for the trials on which the face looks at the distractor. The 'congruency' variable is not necessary to run the experiment; however, it is useful for analyzing the data later on.

We need to do one last thing. 'Repeat' is currently set to '1,00'. This means that each cycle will be executed once. So the block now consists of 8 trials, which is a bit short. A reasonable length for a block of trials is 24, so set 'Repeat' to 3,00 (3 repeats x 8 cycles = 24 trials). You don't need to change 'Order', because 'random' is exactly what we want.

The *block_loop* now looks like %FigStep3. Remember to save your experiment regularly.

%--
figure:
 id: FigStep3
 source: step3.png
 caption: "The *block_loop* at the end of Step 3."
--%

<div class='info-box' markdown='1'>

__Tip__ -- You can set 'Repeat' to a non-integer number. For example, by setting 'Repeat' to '0,5', only half the trials (randomly selected) are executed.

</div>

## Step 3: Add images and sound files to the file pool

For our stimuli, we will use images from file. In addition, we will play a sound if the participant makes an error. For this we need a sound file.

You can download the required files here (in most webbrowsers you can right-click the links and choose 'Save Link As' or a similar option):

- [gaze_neutral.png](/img/beginner-tutorial/gaze_neutral.png)
- [gaze_left.png](/img/beginner-tutorial/gaze_left.png)
- [gaze_right.png](/img/beginner-tutorial/gaze_right.png)
- [incorrect.ogg](/img/beginner-tutorial/incorrect.ogg)

After you have downloaded these files (to your desktop, for example), you can add them to the file pool. If the file pool is not already visible (by default on the right side of the window), click on the 'Show file pool' button in the main toolbar (shortcut: `Ctrl+P`). The easiest way to add the four files to the file pool is to drag them from the desktop (or wherever you have downloaded the files to) into the file pool. Alternatively, you can click on the '+' button in the file pool and add files using the file select dialog that appears. The file pool will be automatically saved with your experiment.

Your file pool now looks like %FigStep4. Remember to save your experiment regularly.

%--
figure:
 id: FigStep4
 source: step4.png
 caption: "The file pool at the end of Step 4."
--%

## Step 4: Fill the trial sequence with items

A trial in our experiment looks as follows (see %TrialSeq):

1. __Fixation dot__ -- 750 ms, `sketchpad` item
2. __Neutral gaze__ -- 750 ms, `sketchpad` item
3. __Gaze cue__ -- 500 ms, `sketchpad` item
4. __Target__  -- 0 ms, `sketchpad` item
5. __Response collection__ 	-- `keyboard_response` item
6. __Play a sound if response was incorrect__ --  `sampler` item
7. __Log response to file__ -- `logger` item


%--
figure:
 id: TrialSeq
 source: trial_sequence_gaze_cuing.png
 caption: "A typical trial sequence in the gaze-cuing experiment."
--%

As you can see in the overview area, our *trial_sequence* already contains one `sketchpad`, as well as a `keyboard_response` item and and a `logger`.


To add the remaining items:

Pick up a `sketchpad` from the item toolbar and drag it into the *trial_sequence*. Repeat this two more times, so that *trial_sequence* contains four `sketchpad`s. Next, select and append a `sampler` item. Make sure the `sampler` item appears right after the *keyboard_response*, but before the *logger*.

Again, we will rename the new items, to make sure that the *trial_sequence* is easy to understand. Rename:

- the first sketchpad to *fixation_dot*
- the second sketchpad to *neutral_gaze*
- the third sketchpad to *gaze_cue*
- the fourth sketchpad to *target*
- the `sampler` item to *incorrect_sound*

The *incorrect_sound* item should only be executed if an error was made. To do this, we need to change the 'Run if …' statement to `[correct] = 0` in the *trial_sequence* tab. This works, because the *keyboard_response* item automatically creates a `correct` variable, which is set to `1` (correct), `0` (incorrect), or `undefined` (this relies on the `correct_response` variable that was defined in Step 3). The square brackets indicate that `correct` should be interpreted as the name of a variable and not as text. To change a run-if statement, double click on it (shortcut: `F3`).

The *trial_sequence* now looks like %FigStep5.

%--
figure:
 id: FigStep5
 source: step5.png
 caption: "The *trial_sequence* at the end of Step 5."
--%

<div class='info-box' markdown='1'>

__Tip__ -- Variables and conditional "if" statements are very powerful! To learn more about them, see:

- %link:manual/variables%

</div>

## Step 5: Draw the sketchpad items

The `sketchpad` items that we have created in Step 5 are still blank. It's time to do some drawing!

__Draw the fixation dot__

- Open the *fixation_dot* tab by clicking on this item in the overview area. Because we chose the 'Extended template', OpenSesame already created a fixation point for us. The only thing we need to change is how long the fixation dot will remain on screen
- Click on the 'Duration' box and change its value to 750 (see %TrialSeq).

__Draw the neutral gaze__

Open the *neutral_gaze* item. Now select the `image tool` by clicking on the button with the moon-mountain-landscape-like icon. Click on the center of the screen (0, 0). The 'Select file from pool' dialog will appear. Select the file `gaze_neutral.png` and click on the 'Select' button. The neutral gaze image will now stare at you from the center of the screen! Finally, like before, change the 'Duration' field from 'keypress' to '750'.

__Draw the gaze cue__

Open the *gaze_cue* item, and again select the `image` tool. Click on the center of the screen (0, 0) and select the file `gaze_left.png`.

Obviously, we are not done yet, because the gaze cue should not always be 'left', but should depend on the variable `gaze_cue`, which we have defined in Step 3. However, by drawing the `gaze_left.png` image to the sketchpad, we have generated a script that needs only a tiny modification to make sure that the proper image is shown. Click on the 'Select view' button at the top-right of the *gaze_cue* tab and select 'View script'. You will now see the script that corresponds to the sketchpad that we have just created:

~~~ .python
set duration keypress
set description "Displays stimuli"
draw image center=1 file="gaze_left.png" scale=1 show_if=always x=0 y=0 z_index=0
~~~

The only thing that we need to do is replace `gaze_left.png` with `gaze_[gaze_cue].png`. This means that OpenSesame uses the variable `gaze_cue` (which has the values `left` and `right`) to determine which image should be shown.

While we are at it, we might as well change the duration to '500'. The script now looks like this:

~~~ .python
set duration 500
set description "Displays stimuli"
draw image center=1 file="gaze_[gaze_cue].png" scale=1 show_if=always x=0 y=0 z_index=0
~~~

Click the 'Apply and close' button at the top right to apply your changes to the script and return to the regular item controls. OpenSesame will warn you that the image cannot be shown, because it is defined using variables, and a placeholder image will be shown instead. Don't worry, the correct image will be shown during the experiment!

__Draw the target__

We want three objects to be part of the target display: the target letter, the distractor letter, and the gaze cue (see %FigGazeCuing). As before, we will start by creating a static display using the `sketchpad` editor. After this, we will only need to make minor changes to the script so that the exact display depends on the variables.

Click on *target* in the overview to open the target tab and like before, draw the `gaze_left.png` image at the center of the screen. Now select the `draw text tool` by clicking on the button with the 'A' icon. The default font size is 18 px, which is a bit small for our purpose, so change the font size to 32 px. Now click on (-320, 0) in the sketchpad (the X-coordinate does not need to be exactly 320, since we will change this to a variable anyway). Enter "[target_letter]" in the dialog that appears, to draw the target letter (when drawing text, you can use variables directly). Similarly, click on (320, 0) and draw an 'X' (the distractor is always an 'X').

Now open the script editor by clicking on the 'Select view' button at the top-right of the tab and selecting 'View script'. The script looks like this:

~~~ .python
set duration keypress
set description "Displays stimuli"
draw image center=1 file="gaze_left.png" scale=1 show_if=always x=0 y=0 z_index=0
draw textline center=1 color=black font_bold=no font_family=mono font_italic=no font_size=32 html=yes show_if=always text="[target_letter]" x=-320 y=0 z_index=0
draw textline center=1 color=black font_bold=no font_family=mono font_italic=no font_size=32 html=yes show_if=always text=X x=320 y=0 z_index=0
~~~

Like before, change `gaze_left.png` to `gaze_[gaze_cue].png`. We also need to make the position of the target and the distractor depend on the variables `target_pos` and `dist_pos` respectively. To do this, simply change `-320` to `[target_pos]` and `320` to `[dist_pos]`. Make sure that you leave the `0`, which is the Y-coordinate. The script now looks like this:

~~~ .python
set duration "keypress"
set description "Displays stimuli"
draw image center=1 file="gaze_[gaze_cue].png" scale=1 show_if=always x=0 y=0 z_index=0
draw textline center=1 color=black font_bold=no font_family=mono font_italic=no font_size=32 html=yes show_if=always text="[target_letter]" x=[target_pos] y=0 z_index=0
draw textline center=1 color=black font_bold=no font_family=mono font_italic=no font_size=32 html=yes show_if=always text=X x=[dist_pos] y=0 z_index=0
~~~

Click on the 'Apply and close' button to apply the script and go back to the regular item controls.

Finally, set the 'Duration' field to '0'. This does not mean that the target is presented for only 0 ms, but that the experiment will advance to the next item (the *keyboard_response*) right away. Since the *keyboard_response* waits for a response, but doesn't change what's on the screen, the target will remain visible until a response has been given.

Remember to save your experiment regularly.

<div class='info-box' markdown='1'>

__Tip__ -- Again, make sure that the (foreground) color is set to black. Otherwise you will draw white on white and won't see anything!

</div>

## Step 7: Configure the keyboard response item

Click on *keyboard_response* in the overview to open its tab. You see three options: Correct response, Allowed responses, and Timeout.

We have already set the `correct_response` variable in Step 3. Unless we explicitly specify a correct response, OpenSesame automatically uses the `correct_response` variable if it is available. Therefore, we don't need to change the 'Correct response' field here.

We do need to set the allowed responses. Enter 'z;m' in the allowed-responses field (or other keys if you have chosen different response keys). The semicolon is used to separate responses. The `keyboard_response` item now only accepts 'z' and 'm' keys. All other key presses are ignored, with the exception of 'escape', which pauses the experiment.

We also want to set a timeout, which is the maximum interval that the KEYBOARD_RESPONSE waits before deciding that the response is incorrect and setting the 'response' variable to 'None'. '2000' (ms) is a good value.

The content of the *keyboard_response* item now looks like %FigStep7.

%--
figure:
 id: FigStep7
 source: step7.png
 caption: "The *keyboard_response* at the end of Step 7."
--%

## Step 8: Configure the incorrect (sampler) item

The *incorrect_sound* item doesn't need much work: We only need to select the sound that should be played. Click on *incorrect_sound* in the overview to open its tab. Click on the 'Browse' button and select `incorrect.ogg` from the file pool.

The sampler now looks like %FigStep8.

%--
figure:
 id: FigStep8
 source: step8.png
 caption: "The *incorrect_sound* item at the end of Step 8."
--%

## Step 9: Configure the variable logger

Actually, we don't need to configure the `logger` item, but let's take a look at it anyway. Click on *logger* in the overview to open its tab. You see that the option 'Log all variables (recommended)' is selected. This means that OpenSesame logs everything, which is fine.

<div class='info-box' markdown='1'>

__The one tip to rule them all__ -- Always triple-check whether all the necessary variables are logged in your experiment! The best way to check this is to run the experiment and investigate the resulting log files.

</div>

## Step 10: Draw the feedback item

After every block of trials, we want to present feedback to the participant to let him/ her know how well he/ she is doing. Therefore, in Step 2, we added a `feedback` item, simply named *feedback* to the end of *block_sequence*.

Click on *feedback* in the overview to open its tab, select the draw text tool, change the foreground color to 'black' (if it isn't already), and click at (0, 0). Now enter the following text:

    End of block

    Your average response time was [avg_rt] ms
    Your accuracy was [acc] %

    Press any key to continue

Because we want the feedback item to remain visible as long as the participant wants (i.e. until he/ she presses a key), we leave 'Duration' field set to 'keypress'.

The feedback item now looks like %FigStep_10.

%--
figure:
 id: FigStep_10
 source: step10.png
 caption: "The feedback item at the end of Step 10."
--%

<div class='info-box' markdown='1'>

__Background box__

__Feedback and variables__ -- Response items automatically keep track of the accuracy and average response time of the participant in the variables 'acc' (synonym: 'accuracy') and 'avg_rt' (synonym: 'average_response_time') respectively. See also:

- %link:manual/variables%

__Tip__ -- Make sure that the (foreground) color is set to black. Otherwise you will draw white on white and won't see anything!

</div>

## Step 11: Set the length of the practice phase and experimental phase

We have previously created the *practice_loop* and *experiment_loop* items, which both call *block_sequence* (i.e., a block of trials). However, right now they call *block_sequence* only once, which means that both the practice and the experimental phase consist of only a single block of trials.

Click on *practice_loop* to open its tab and set 'Repeat' to '2,00'. This means that the practice phase consists of two blocks.

Click on *experimental_loop* to open its tab and set 'Repeat' to '8,00'. This means that the experimental phase consists of eight blocks.

<div class='info-box' markdown='1'>

__Tip__ -- You can create a variable `practice` in both *practice_loop* and *experimental_loop* and set it to 'yes' and 'no' respectively. This is an easy way of keeping track of which trials were part of the practice phase.

</div>

## Step 12: Write the instruction, end_of_practice and end_of_experiment forms

I think you can handle this step your own! Simply open the appropriate items and add some text to present instructions, an end-of-practice message, and an end-of-experiment message.

## Step 13: Run the experiment!

You're done! Click on the 'Run in window' (shortcut: `Ctrl+W`) or 'Run fullscreen' (shortcut: `Ctrl+R`) buttons in the toolbar to run your experiment.

<div class='info-box' markdown='1'>

__Background box__

__Tip__ -- A test run is executed even faster by clicking the orange 'Run in window' button (shortcut: `Ctrl+Shift+W`), which doesn't ask you how to save the logfile (and should therefore only be used for testing purposes).

</div>

## References

<div class='reference' markdown='1'>

Friesen, C. K., & Kingstone, A. (1998). The eyes have it! Reflexive orienting is triggered by nonpredictive gaze. *Psychonomic Bulletin & Review*, *5*, 490–495. doi:10.3758/BF03208827

Mathôt, S., Schreij, D., & Theeuwes, J. (2012). OpenSesame: An open-source, graphical experiment builder for the social sciences. *Behavior Research Methods*, *44*(2), 314-324. doi:10.3758/s13428-011-0168-7


</div>

[references]: #references
[gpl]: http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html
[gimp]: http://www.gimp.org/
[audacity]: http://audacity.sourceforge.net/
[python inline scripting]: /python/about
