title: Release notes for 4.0.0

OpenSesame 4.0 *Melodramatic Milgram* is a major new release with many new features and improvements.


[TOC]

## Important: Backwards incompatible changes

- Logging of variables has changed slightly. Specifically, variables that are defined in the user interface, such as columns in a `loop` table or explicitly selected variables in a `logger`, are always logged. Variables that are defined in an `inline_script` or `inline_javascript` are only logged if they are numbers (`int` and `float`), strings (`str` and `bytes`), and `None` values. This is to avoid log files from becoming unreasonably large due to logging of long lists and other large values.
- The content of `<script>` tags in `inline_html` items is not evaluated. This is no longer necessary, because you can simply refer to experimental variables as you would elsewhere in JavaScript (see below).
- Conditional expressions are only interpreted as OpenSesame script if they contain variable references using the square-bracket notation or the words 'always' or 'never'. Otherwise they are interpreted as Python expressions as described below.
  
## New OpenSesame Python module (no GUI)

For those of you who prefer coding over using a GUI: You can now use OpenSesame as a Python module.

```python
from libopensesame.python_workspace_api import \
  Experiment, Canvas, Keyboard, Text

# Initialize the experiment window using the legacy backend
exp, win, clock, log = Experiment(canvas_backend='legacy')
# Prepare a stimulus canvas and a keyboard
cnv = Canvas()
cnv += Text('Hello world')
kb = Keyboard()
# Show the canvas, wait for a key press, and then end the experiment
cnv.show()
kb.get_key()
exp.end()
```

See also:

- %link:manual/python/nogui%

## Improved integration with Python and JavaScript

The integration between OpenSesame and Python (on the desktop)/ JavaScript (in the browser) is now more intuitive. Specifically, OpenSesame-specific syntax has partly been replaced by standard Python/ JavaScript syntax, and there is no longer a distinction between experimental variables and global variables in Python/ JavaScript.


### {} instead of []: Support for formatted string literals (f-strings)

The preferred notation for referring to variables in the user interface is now using curly braces (`{my_var}`), rather than square brackets (`[my_var]`).

You can even include full Python expressions within curly braces. For example, the following text on a SKETCHPAD will include the text 'Well done!' if accuracy is above 70% and the text 'Try harder!' otherwise.

```text
Your accuray is {acc} %. {'Well done!' if acc > 70 else 'Try harder!'}
```

When running an experiment with OSWeb in a browser, the Python code inside curly braces is automatically converted to JavaScript. This means that you can use the same Python expressions inside curly braces on the desktop and in a browser.

For more information, see:

- <https://docs.python.org/3/reference/lexical_analysis.html#f-strings>


### Support for Python-style conditional expressions

The preferred syntax for run-if, break-if, show-if, and other conditional expressions is Python, rather than OpenSesame script. This means that the following run-if expression results in an item only being run when the variable `correct` equals 1, that is, after a correct response. (This is also related to the fact that experimental variables are now globals, see below.)

```python
correct == 1
```

When running an experiment with OSWeb in a browser, Python conditional expressions are automatically converted to JavaScript. This means that you can use the same Python run-if, break-if, show-if, and other conditional expressions on the desktop and in a browser.


### Persistent JavaScript workspace

The JavaScript workspace is now persistent. This means that you can define a function or variable in one `inline_javascript` and then refer to it in another `inline_javascript`.


### Experimental variables are globals

Experimental variables, such as `response_time` and variables defined in LOOP items, are now global variables within Python and JavaScript. This means that you no longer have to use the `var` (Python) or `vars` object, but can directly refer experimental variables by their name.

Python:

```python
# Access an existing experimental variable by its name
print('response = ', response)
# Define a new experimental variable (which can be used also in the GUI)
new_experimental_variable = 'example'
```

JavaScript:

```javascript
// Access an existing experimental variable by its name
console.log('response = ' + response)
// Define a new experimental variable (which can be used also in the GUI)
// Note: Variables defined using `let` are *not* globally available!
var new_experimental_variable = 'example'
```

## Improved user interface

There have been usability improvements through the user interface:

- Improved icons: The open and save icons have been redesigned because they were experienced as unclear by some users
- Run-if, break-if, show-if, and other conditional expressions are annotated for clarity ('Always run')
- OSWeb now appears as a backend
- Items that are not compatible with the experiment settings are disabled
- Items in an experiment can be disabled. This is mostly useful for development purposes, for example to temporarily disable the instructions.
- Error messages are now much more informative.
- A new updater extension automatically checks for updates to selected packages. This provides an easy way to keep OpenSesame up to date without having to re-download and re-install the software.


## Interleaved Quest staircase

The `quest_staircase_init` and `quest_staircase_next` items now accept a name, which allows you to run multiple Quest procedures in parallel. This is mostly useful if you want to run independent, interleaved Quest procedures for different experimental conditions.


## Linked sketchpad in mouse_response supported in OSWeb

The MOUSE_RESPONSE now supports linked SKETCHPAD items in OSWeb, making it just as easy to work with regions of interest in browser-based experiments as in lab-based experiments!


## For developers: Improved plugin and extension API

The plugin and extension API has been simplified and revised to reflect current best practices in Python development:

- %link:dev/plugin%
- %link:dev/extension%
